---
source_url: https://archive.org/download/jch_c64_zip/jch_c64.zip -> ED_TEXTS.ZIP -> 20_G4_IN.TXT
fetched_via: curl + unzip 2026-06-15
fetch_date: 2026-06-15
author: Jens-Christian Huus (JCH) of Vibrants
content_date: 1991-07-xx (Update version 3, July 1991)
reliability: primary
---

* ADDENDUM 20/8-1995: This is the instructions for the very last and most
* advanced player version I made for the editor. If you are to make music in
* the editor (it be in a PC emulator or on the C64 directly) - and the raster-
* time is less important - then THIS is the player you should use! If you
* know rastertime is important, have a look at player v17 or v19 instead.


Instructions for NewPlayer v20.G4 and further updates.

Typed by JCH, May 1991. Update version 3, July 1991.

Here's yet another NewPlayer, combining the complexity of NP v18 with the
advantage of having a much shorter rastertime - plus a few new features
thrown in as well! NewPlayer v20 was built upon v18, but quite a few
functions have been changed and added, like throwing away the hard restart
command and installing an on/off function for it in the 8-byte instrument
instead - much like NP v14. Other new things as half-speeds and completely
redesigned puls and filter step-programming makes it a fresh change from the
other NewPlayers. Again, it is highly recommended that you have already read
and understood the instructions for NewPlayer v14, v15 and v18 in order to
get the most out of these instructions. To keep it short I will often refer
to NP v18 whenever I am discussing a table where only, say, one single byte
have been changed.


The 8-Byte instrument table.

         00  00  00  00  00  00  00  00
         --  --  --  --  --  --  --  --
         A   B   C   D   E   F   G   H

The only byte changed from v18 to the new v20 is byte C. All other bytes
works EXACTLY as in NewPlayer v18.

Byte C used to control the hifreq-drum mode in v18 only (ON or OFF), but in
v20 it has been split up into controlling three functions: Hifreq, hard
restart on/off and the speed of the chosen arpeggio-table. The first nibble
can be either 0, 4, 8 or C. The 4 sets hifreq, and 8 hard restart. So, if you
want hifreq drums you write a $40, and if hard restart is preferred as well
you add $80 to it which gives $C0 in all. The hard restart has a stuck timer
at $2 built inside the music-routine and cannot be changed. This shouldn't
bother you at all, since this timer-value is the best you can have anyway!
The timervalue of $2 however makes it impossible for you to play at any lower
tune speed than 2, more about this later though.

The second nibble in byte C controls the SPEED of the arpeggio, 0 is fastest
and F is very very slow. This is a function found in many music routines, but
has first been introduced into this player v20. It saves you a lot of time,
imagine having a wide number of chords in a tune - all with 00, 03, 07 steps
(and so on), the fastest chord arpeggio - then later, you actually COULD use
a somewhat slower chord "speed", to change the mood of the music. Then
instead of having to alter ALL those damn chord arpeggio's you just alter
this speed nibble. This selector also works in hifreq mode.

Some examples:

         40 - Hifreq on, hard restart off, arpeggio speed 00 (fastest).
         83 - Hifreq off, hard restart on, arpeggio speed 03 (slower).
         01 - No hifreq or hard restart (off), arpeggio speed 01.
         CF - Both hifreq and hard restart on, arpeggio VEEEERY slow!


The super/slide table.

Not much has happened in this table, the hard restart command ($8x) has been
discarded, otherwise all other commands also found in NP v18, are present -
like speed-change, volumen, sustain, chord-change, slide and vibrato etc.

However one thing that is nice to know is that the speed-change option (When
you use "E0 0x") has been improved. Now it can't bring the voices out of
synchronization, no matter where you put it in the sequence! If you're
familiar with player v18 you'll know this was quite a problem in that player.

The very first position of the super table has been reserved for use as a
"Hard restart" setting. Start all your "Sxx" commands off at position $01.
More about this setting later.


The arpeggio-table.

This table can do everything it could in NP v18, plus a new little detail
added in; the $7E endmark. Normally you've always been using $7F with a loop
pointer (like a sample), but some players (like LAXITY's and JOZZ's to
mention a few) also offers the $7E endmark, which simply repeats the very
last step all the time. Very small addition really, as you could achieve the
same thing easily with $7F, but what the heck. However, using the $7E endmark
COULD cause mistunderstandings in the PACKER! The NP-packer has been designed
to check the length of the arpeggio table by hunting for the $7F mark, so if
you've used a $7E in the last arpeggio program the packer will erase it.
Actually, it will erase everything until it DOES meet a $7F endmark - imagine
you haven't used any $7F at all, and you can see that the entire arpeggio
table could be erased completely inside the packer! OK, but what do I do to
prevent that? Simple, just make sure the very LAST arpeggio program uses a
$7F endmark, and you won't get any problems. By the way, sorry for not
highlighting the $7E mark with light-green like the $7F endmark, but the
editor wasn't designed for this kind of future expansion. I hope you
understand.


The Pulsating table.

Both this table and the filter table have been completely redesigned in this
player. Get ready to learn a completely new system, the same system as used
in LAXITY's player. This kind of step-programming is both much easier to use,
and more difficult at the same time! Simply because you have almost no
special bits to look out for, but on the other hand you must take care of all
boundary settings yourself. The byte functions themselves are quite easy to
explain:

         00  00  00  00
         --  --  --  --
         A   B   C   D

Byte A sets the start puls. This is exactly the same as byte 4 in the old
system, the first nibble is the low-puls and the last is hi. SO as you know,
$08 is a very loud puls while $10 is very weak. A special byte command
however is value $FF which won't set a new puls, but tell the music-routine
NOT to set a new puls but continue using the puls it is currently working
with. This is useful when calling new sets in the step programming.

Byte B sets the speed of the pulsating, ranging from $00 to $FF.

Byte C defines the life time of the set, $00-$7F frames. When the time has
expired the music routine will call the next set, as defined in byte D. This
is the only byte using a bit - BIT 7 to determine puls speed direction -
unlike the old system, where you had all sorts of bits to look out for,
especially in byte 3. Back to business, The 7th bit sets the direction of the
puls-speed, 0=up, 1=down. Meaning, that you must add the duration with $80 to
puls downwards! Speeds available are therefore $00-$FF (in byte B) with byte
C's bit 7 determining the direction of the speed, adding or subtracting.

Byte D sets a pointer to the next set whenever the frame counter in byte C
has expired. The pointers used are simply the very same as in the puls table,
the pointer like 0C: XX XX XX XX, this is f.ex set number $0C.

As you can see it isn't as hard to understand this new system as the older
one was. The difficult part however is actually getting USED to running a
clever puls in this system, which ain't as straight-forward as it seems. In
the old system you had boundary nibbles in the same set, but as you don't
have this here you must "jump" between two sets adding and subtracting the
speeds in order to simulate a swinging puls.

Let's assume you want to start at puls $0C and move towards the $0F, then
somewhere along the path you want to start a puls swing.

         00: 0C 40 08 04
         04: FF 40 84 08
         08: FF 40 04 04

In set 00 it starts at puls 0C, and then adds with $40 for 8 frames, then
goes to set number 04. Here it continues with whatever puls it might have,
now subtracting with 40 (because $80 is added to byte C!) for 4 frames. After
running the 4 frames it goes to set 08, continuing again with the last puls,
now adding instead for 4 frames, then GOES BACK to SET 04! As you can see in
this example, the puls routine will keep on alternating between set 04 and 08
as long as the instrument lasts. Subtracting and adding with 40 all the time
then gives the impression of a swinging controlled puls with boundary
control. This method of controlling the puls program gives much more
flexibility than the old system. Just altering one of the frame counter's
slightly in either set 04 or 08 would make the puls sound swinging, yet
giving the impression of "moving inspite of the swinging", so to speak.


The filter-sweep table.

The step-programming bytes are almost exactly alike in the filter table. Byte
A sets the start filter, 00-FE (FF uses the current filter freq), byte C the
frames and byte D the pointer to the next set. However, the speed counter in
Byte B is slightly different.

Instead of having a bit 7 to determine the direction of the filter adding
(the "speed") I use the power of wrapping bytes. In other words, to save
raster time this byte is actually only capable of adding! So how can you
subtract with this byte? Simply by reversing it!! This may seem confusing to
the musician not fully into hexadecimal numbers and m/c programming, but as
you know, the byte values used in all tables can go from $00 to $FF. If a
machine code routine is made in an assembler which adds with 1 all the time
to a byte, then it will automatically wrap back to the $00 as soon as it
reaches the $FF... This is very common and natural to most people, but let's
say you were adding with $FF instead of 1! Then the byte value $00 would be
added with $FF, giving $FF (quite logical!), the second time it will be added
it says $FE, simply because of the way a byte "wraps"! So as you can see, you
can "simulate" a subtracting of 1 by adding with $FF! This is what you can
use with succes in the speed byte of the filter-sweep table.

If you type $10 in byte B, you will be adding with $10 as wanted, but if you
type $F0 you will be subtracting with $10! This might take some time to get
used to if you not a programmer, but you'll soon get the hang of it!


The first 4 bytes in the filter-sweep table.

As usual the first 4 bytes in the filter table has been reserved, meaning
that you must start all filter programs from pointer position 04. The first 4
bytes has been used almost fully in NP v20 this time.

         02  03  00  00
         --  --  --  --
         A   B   C   D

Byte A & B are the half speed selectors, I will return to them later.

Byte C is unused in v20.G3 and up. In older versions, it was used as the
raster decrease byte. However, since the decreasing can't be "heard" in the
v20 series I changed it into being set automatically somewhere else, when
packing!

Byte D is the filter-sweep to voice controller, working exactly as in NP v15
and NP v18.


How to make music using half-speeds.

Before going into details about how to use half-speeds, one word of warning.
Using the "+CHANGE SPEED" merge-file in the disk-menu you can make sure the
SHIFT-B command ("follow-play") follows the eventual speed change using the
"E0" command in the super-table, but the editor wasn't originally designed to
cope with the new "half-speed" facility. The SHIFT-B option can't under any
circumstances follow the odd half-speeds, it will simply loose track of the
music itself and go out of synchronization. If you are very dependant of the
SHIFT-B function (I know some are), then I advise you to compose in a "clean"
speed - then you can always set the music to the desired half-speed when the
music has been finished!

* ADDENDUM 20/8-1995: The "+CHANGE SPEED" merge-file is built-in to the newest
* editor v3.04 included in this package. This will make sure that "E0" speed-
* change commands will work with SHIFT-B, but remember that it will still not
* understand the half-speed settings possible in player v20.

This music-routine version can, as previously mentioned, only use tune speeds
2 up to 9. It cannot work at speed 0 nor 1, because of the hard restart
programming, amongst many other technical reasons (I sure got out of that one
easy, didn't I!). However, the speeds 0 and 1 CAN be selected (using SHIFT S
and D as usual) as a special option to tell the music routine to work in a
special speed mode. Whenever you set the tune-speed to 0 or 1, the routine
will look at the very first TWO numbers in the filter-table and switch
between them. In these two bytes you can therefore type f.ex $02 and $03 to
simulate speed 2 and a half!

The option of selecting speed 0 or 1 (with SHIFT S/D) to point at the two
speed bytes in the filter table can be accessed with the "speed-change"
command inside the supercommand table as well. Imagine starting at a clean
speed 4, then later accessing "E0 01". Then the music routine will
automatically use the half-speed bytes defined in the filter table, as usual.
Now remember that the SHIFT-B command inside the editor CANNOT follow the
half-speed, instead it will try to follow the pseudo speed 0 or 1, which is
completely wrong.

In the speed bytes (the filter table) you can mix any half-speed you like.
Actually you can type 00 or 01 too, but this isn't advisable because the
music routine can't run at these speeds! Note that mixing speeds as $02 and
$04 is actually the same as a clean speed $03! Otherwise you are free to mix
whatever speed you want, as long as you keep both values between $02 and $09.


Inside the packer.

In older versions (below v20.G3) you could set a raster-decrease flag using
the F6 "Control-bytes" key, but in the newer updates it is set automatically
when the tunes has been packed. The reason for doing this is that the
music-player won't skip the arpeggio nor the slide routine while setting this
byte... In 99.9% of all tunes made in v20 you will NOT be able to hear the
difference anyway! When packed the player normally keeps the raster-time at
around $21 scanlines, which is quite an improvement compared to the dreaded
NP v18.


Undesired side-affects.

No big bugs ought to be hunting in v20. One small irritating detail could be
the fact that an empty sequence assumes a "filter on" in that voice. Meaning
that a bass made in f.ex voice 1 while voice 2 and 3 are completely empty
will sound like all three voices are filtered (i.e. low volumen). But as soon
as you make something in the other voices this effect will dissappear. It
shouldn't worry you too much really.

The hard restart implemented in this player version is quite hard, and has a
stuck timer at $2 which cannot be changed. The nature of the hard restart can
be altered by changing the release part of the instrument's ADSR to make sure
the hard restart gets the desired effect. However the hard restart ADSR can
be changed in the first position of the SUPER commands table too, normally
the values found here is 0F 00. This is a very "hard" hard restart setting,
but try other values like f.ex 00 01 or 0F 04 to get other effects.

Last, the promised decreased raster-time at $21 (mentioned earlier) is the
average time when using vibrato in one or two voices. Because NP v20 is using
the same calculated vibrato routine as NP v15 and v18, it is possible that
heavy use of vibrato can cause unexpected raster flips in packed state.
Otherwise the rastertime looks very controlled, kinda like LAXITY's
raster-time if I may say so...!

Anyway, good luck with the player!


Jens-Christian Huus.
