---
source_url: https://www.gamejournal.it/driving-the-sid-chip-assembly-language-composition-and-sound-design-for-the-c64/
fetched_via: direct
fetch_date: 2026-04-11
author: James Newman (Bath Spa University, FHEA)
content_date: "unknown (journal article, no publication year in text)"
reliability: secondary
---
SOURCE: https://www.gamejournal.it/driving-the-sid-chip-assembly-language-composition-and-sound-design-for-the-c64/
FETCHED DIRECTLY (live): 2026-04-11

"Driving the SID Chip: Assembly Language, Composition, and Sound Design for the C64"
By James Newman (Bath Spa University, FHEA)
G|A|M|E Journal

Keywords: SID chip; driver affordance; design potential; Rob Hubbard; Martin Galway

=== ABSTRACT ===

This paper argues that, more than any other device, the SID chip is responsible for
shaping the sound of videogame music. The argument centers on the inexorable link
between the technological and the musical: composer-coders like Rob Hubbard and Martin
Galway developed their own bespoke low-level drivers to interface with the SID chip to
create pseudo-polyphony through rapid arpeggiation and channel sharing, drum synthesis
through waveform manipulation, portamento, and even sample playback. The paper analyzes
the indivisibility of sound design, synthesis and composition in the birth of these
musical forms and aesthetics.

=== KEY TECHNICAL CLAIMS AND QUOTES ===

--- SID CHIP BASICS ---

The SID is built around three discrete channels/voices. Each voice is an individually
addressable monophonic subtractive synthesizer.

SID's oscillators offer four independently selectable waveforms: sawtooth, triangle,
pulse, and noise. Crucially, waveforms are NOT tied to channels - they can be altered
on a per-cycle basis and used to cross-modulate one another (sync- and ring-modulation).

Pulse waveform: continuous duty cycle control. PWM effect described by Chris Huelsbeck
as "the holy grail of its [the SID chip's] power."

Per-channel ADSR envelopes. Attack times as short as a couple of milliseconds,
release times approaching 30 seconds.

SID interface: 29 8-bit registers. Access via BASIC PEEK/POKE or Assembly.

Bob Yannes (SID designer): "I thought the sound chips on the market, including those
in the Atari computers, were primitive and obviously had been designed by people who
knew nothing about music."

Charles Winterble (MOS Technology): "This thing is already 10 times better than
anything else out there and 20 times better than it needs to be."

--- DRIVER AS INSTRUMENT ---

"I used to load up a machine code monitor and literally display the bytes in real time.
The music was all triggered on the raster interrupt and I would start changing the numbers
in real time to alter the synth settings and musical notes. So, I would tend to work on
four bar chunks... and I would sit on that Hex editor, changing things."
(Hubbard, 2002)

"I was writing my own assembly-language music routines. The music routines were basically
controlling the chip, and whatever you could do with the software to get some more sounds,
or anything more interesting… you would write the music to take advantage of that. The two
basically went hand in hand… You would come up with an idea for something the software
could do, you would write that, and then write the music to take advantage of it."
(Hubbard, 2005)

--- DRIVER SIZE AND STRUCTURE ---

Hubbard's early SID driver: ~900-1000 bytes. Controls:
- Silencing and initializing the SID chip
- Instrument settings: waveform, envelope times and levels
- Note durations and pitches
- Effects: portamento, vibrato, arpeggiation
- Pulse-width depth and modulation time
- Pattern playback (song -> tracks -> patterns -> notes)

"Song" = three "tracks" (one per voice), each comprising "pattern" numbers referring to
sequences of "notes". Note level: "notework" (pitch) and "soundwork" (effects) routines.
Main loop runs 3 times (once per voice).

Clocked at 50Hz (PAL) / 60Hz (NTSC). Single-frame precision.

--- INSTRUMENT FX: DRUM SYNTHESIS ---

From McSweeney (1993) on Byte 7 of instrument structure:

"Bit#0 signals that this is a drum. Drums are made from a noise channel and also a fast
frequency down, with fast decay. Bass drums use a square wave, and only the first 50th of
a second is a noise channel. This is the tell-tale instrument that gives away a Rob
Hubbard routine! Hihats and other drums use noise all the time."

Key mechanism: ONE frame of noise waveform before switching to pulse/square. The two
waveforms appear to sound simultaneously (noise = stick strike; pitched waveform + pitch
drop = resonance/body/decay).

Also found: Sanxion channel 3 pulse bass instrument augmented with digital noise in
its attack. A 16th-note sequence thus creates both a synthetic bassline AND a continuous
shaker/hi-hat sound from a single channel.

--- INSTRUMENT FX: SKYDIVE AND OCTAVE ARPEGGIO ---

"Bit#1 signals a 'skydive'. This is a slower frequency down, that I think sounds like
somebody yelling as they fall out of a plane."
(McSweeney, 1993)

"Bit#2 signals an octave arpeggio. It's a very limited arpeggio routine in this song.
Listen for the arpeggio and the skydive when combined, which is used a lot in Hubbard songs."
(McSweeney, 1993)

Skydive + octave arpeggio = "a distinctive musical and sound design trait in Hubbard's output"
(evident in Monty on the Run, Crazy Comets, etc.)

--- CHANNEL MULTIPLEXING ---

"Most of it was simply done by multiplexing the three channels. If the lead line has two
beats rest, put a fill or some effect in there."
(Hubbard, n.d.)

In Commando: channel 1 = lead melody, channel 2 = pseudo-polyphonic chordal backing
via rapid arpeggiation, channel 3 = bassline. Drums/percussion spread across ALL three
channels (no dedicated drum channel). Ring modulated percussion on channel 2,
noise+toms on channel 1, snare on channel 3.

--- RAPID ARPEGGIATION ---

By cycling two or more notes at 50Hz, composers simulate multiple simultaneous notes.
Rate is NOT musically derived - it's a function of the C64's processor and screen-update
interrupt system (50Hz PAL refresh).

Rapid arpeggiation + PWM = "chordal warbling" - "perhaps more than any other, characteristic
of chip music."

--- DRIVER EVOLUTION AND "PERSONALITY" ---

Martin Galway: "I didn't develop pulse-width modulation until the next project, which at
the time was called Cyclone."

Hubbard on Monty on the Run: "The middle section was an excuse to use the new pitch bend
code that I wrote for this project."

Chris Abbott (C64audio.com): "Rob Hubbard sounded very different from Martin Galway
because they had to write their own synthesizer engine, as well as the music."

Galway: "I suppose I was simply wanting to use his [Hubbard's] program to get all that
percussion. I wouldn't have minded having a go with his software and doing music in my
style with his percussion. Perhaps we should have swapped drivers for a game just to see
what we could have come up with."
(Carr, 2001b)

Hubbard's driver: emphasis on rhythmic elements, drums/percussion.
Galway's driver: focus on waveform manipulation, ring modulation, PWM.

--- SAMPLE PLAYBACK: HIDDEN AFFORDANCE ---

Sample playback exploits a DC offset between the SID channels arising from chip design
and fabrication. By rapidly manipulating the chip's amplitude registers, otherwise
undesirable clicks can be generated which, clocked at the right rate with suitable data,
create PCM-like output (Pulse Code Modulation).

"The 'fourth' voice is actually a phantom that appears across at the SID's output stage
as a result of the interaction of the other channels."

The "8580" revision of SID removed the DC offset, making sample playback all but inaudible.
"The affordance was not simply re-hidden but eradicated altogether."

Galway on discovering sample playback:
"I figured out how samples were played by hacking into someone else's code. I had no
equipment for editing samples though, so my program synthesized the drums as a series of
farts and burps! Later I was able to acquire some proper drum samples and by 'Game Over'
it got quite sophisticated."
(Galway n.d.)

Hubbard: "I did write a driver that could play 2 samples plus SID, but never used it
on a game."

--- HUBBARD ON EXPERIMENTING WITH SID ---

"We were always looking for ways to try to find something that the machine could do that it
really wasn't designed to do. You'd look in the manual on the C64 and it would say things
like… don't set this bit whatever you do and we'd say 'OK, I don't care, I'm going to try
setting the bit and see if it does anything'. We were always looking for ways to squeeze more
out of this thing by doing things in assembler and tweaking around."
(Hubbard, 2002)

--- LEGACY AND HARDWARE INSTRUMENTS ---

Elektron SidStation Owner's Manual: "SID is the classic synthesizer that never had a case
built around it."

Modern SID instruments (Elektron SidStation, Twisted Electrons Therapsid) support
integration with modern DAWs, but their interfaces disallow techniques available via
1980s drivers. Frame-accurate waveform manipulation is not available in these interfaces.
"The SID chip is, therefore, constructed as a different instrument, and the suite of
affordances is materially altered."

--- HISTORICAL NOTE ON DOCUMENTATION ---

According to Yannes, the SID documentation was written before completion of SID prototypes,
rendering it unintentionally inaccurate. Experimentation was rewarded because SID's registers
behaved in sometimes unpredictable ways modified in combination, or in ways musicians found
more useful than the designers expected.

Commodore Programmer's Reference Guide: "Only through experimentation on your own will you
fully appreciate the capabilities of your machine. The examples in this section of the
Programmer's Reference Guide merely scratch the surface."

=== REFERENCES CITED ===

McSweeney, Anthony (1993). "Rob Hubbard's Music: Disassembled, Commented and Explained."
  Recollection Issue 3 (= the primary technical source for driver internals)

Hubbard (2002). Interview source - full technical quotes about workflow and hex editing.
Hubbard (2005). Interview source - quotes about writing routines simultaneously with music.
Carr, Neil (2001b). Martin Galway interview.
Galway (n.d.). Various quotes on sample playback discovery and PWM.
