(C) 1994-1999 Balázs Takács
(C) 1999-2000 Levente Hársfalvi


Welcome to the documentation of SIDwinder, the ultimate SID music composer
package...

This text holds information about the story and the rather general things
around this editor.


Table of Contents
-----------------

01 The story
01.01 In the beginning...
01.02 Taki's point of view...
01.03 Finally...
02 Thanks...
03 How to start...
04 Detailed info
04.01 The editor
04.02 The packer
04.03 The ASCII viewer
05 Possible improvements...
06 Contact



01 The story
-------------

This is - as you, I think, guessed well without my explanation - a music
composer package with the appropriate tools. Please let me first tell a few
general things behind the development of this package.


01.01 In the beginning...
--------------------------

First, I'm not a C64 SID musician at all. Not even a 'fundamental' C64
programmer and scener. I just like good musics, and good _synth musics in
particular (...whatever good musics in which oscillators, filters, envelope
generators are involved :-)). My past was rather spent on the Plus/4 scene
since I became a Plus/4 programmer. I coded lots of music 'player' routines
on the Plus/4 - these are often referred as 'music converter routines',
since they make play original C64 tunes on the Plus/4 someway. I've dreamt
of coding a good music composer since a long time (...come and read those
20-30 pages of text I wrote back in '94 as plans / parameters / fileformat
etc. of the DreamTracker ;-) ). However, I never got around to code just a
single byte of the editor; the reasons should be all about the fact that I
never had the appropriate hardware (or if so, the knowledge for the
hardware), the examples, not to mention that I used to be lazy :-/. There
were no _real examples for me on the Plus/4 scene - all 'music composer'
packs had problems somehow, or maybe it was just me who was sick of them so
much :-/. From the other hand, I had no real contact to the C64 scene back
then, thus I had no access to the recent C64 SID music editors - so I never
really had example of good editors. I only knew Future Composer, the
Rockmonitor series and the V1.0 Voicetracker - all had their problems IMO, I
never managed to learn their sometimes weird usage - obsolete player
parameters, lack of readable / even correct documents and so on.

From the other hand, years have passed. Still nobody introduced a _really
useable music editor for the Plus/4. The reasons, if we look for some,
may be behind some facts. The main problem, the good old black (O.K. you're
right - charcoal grey ;-) ) dustbin was introduced without decent sound
capabilities, the TED is really annoying in contrast of the wonderful SID
chip. Really few people made attempts even trying to compose on this machine.
With this, also few people were interested in the tools one could use for
creating tunes on/for the Plus/4. After the early 90's, most Plus/4 sceners
rather used 'converted' musics that were originally composed on the C64. Not
much later, in around 1992, few people (Csory, BSZ and finally, Solder)
designed SID cards to make play the SID tunes better than _any converter
routines could do.

With the presence of the SID card, someone could have also converted a
native C64 music composer package to the Plus/4. ...I don't really know of
such an attempt, maybe, only an old Future Composer version that was slightly
modified to play through the SID card. ...Lack of interest? ...Maybe. Another
reason could be that C64 music editors were really proprietary back then.
Except few known examples, like the above ones and the DMC series, one could
have hardly got just a copy of a good music composer package, still not
speaking of the source code that should have been _impossible to obtain. Facts
are facts, after all. This is sad, but the spirit was rather different to the
one signed with Richard Stallman, the Free Software concept...

As I see, nobody, except few people tried to compose something using native
Plus/4 composer tools. The majority rather took a C64 and did something using
DMC, or - most likely - simply ripped tunes and used them with no permissions
from the authors at all.

Years have passed, again. From my viewpoint, I learnt a lot of practical
knowledge that could have helped me to realise the dream. The most important
one is cross-development: it is much easier to edit sources and compile the
code on a dumb, but powerful PC than on a Commodore platform. Table Driven
Assembler is still my favourite. Later, I coded a small utility, ComLink,
supporting the additional small tasks this method involves. In the meantime,
a lot of C64 programs became accessible for me, because they got uploaded
to various FTP sites (the spirit has changed a lot, after all...).

In the summer of 1998, I started converting Voicetracker, but I soon gave it
up. I reverse engineered the code, but after doing all modifications to make
the stuff compile and made it _start running on the Plus/4, _everytime I
made just the _slightest modification, it crashed :-(. This behaviour shows
that something was wrong, still in the reverse engineering process... (some
indirect memory references should have been missed in the original code).

One year later, Taki announced releasing his SIDwinder V01.22 pack. I
downloaded and checked it - and found it very nice! This was the very first
music composer pack for me that came with full - and _very well written -
documentation, tips and so on coming right from the author. The pack also
included all needed utils and a lot of example songs (composed by Taki) in
loadable source format. ...I still haven't mentioned that Taki's player was
really well optimized and had good effects to play with ;-).

I think the opportunity of converting SIDwinder had some real points I
couldn't have missed: the editor and the player were good, had good
documentation - and after all, I could contact with the author himself and
ask him for the sources, and some help. I simply couldn't resist myself to
do so :-)...


01.02 Taki's point of view...
-----------------------------
(Written by Balázs Takács (Taki / Natural Beat), creator of SIDwinder series
himself)

Some of you might be curious to know how the different versions of SIDwinder
relate to each other. TLC kindly allowed me to waste a few words here about
the background of the development and a bit of history. So here we go...

The original SIDwinder V01.22 is about six years old now, I coded the player
and the tools back in 1994. For various reasons lying in the strange nature
of the old C64 scene, the package remained unreleased over the years. Then,
just about a year ago, a friend of mine asked for the editor -- so I decided
to finally release the SIDwinder V01.22 package to the public.

For a while, I was considering whether I should enclose the assembly source
files or not. I decided not to do so, because I wasn't particularly proud
of the editor and the rest of the tools. Unlike my player, which is highly
optimized, the tools were coded rather in a quick-and-dirty fashion. They
weren't intended to be released ever: back then the only goal I had in mind
was to put those tools together as fast as possible, so that I can finally
do something useful with my player. Besides, I could hardly imagine anyone
willing to tinker with such old and useless stuff.

To make a long story short, I released the binaries with the player source
only, which is the most valuable part after all -- in my opinion. Although
I planned first to release the package under the protection of the GNU GPL
(General Public License), I dropped the idea, since it would have required
the complete source to be included, of course.

A few months later I received an email from TLC. He was planning to create
a Plus/4 conversion of my SIDwinder V01.22, and asked whether I could send
him the source files which I failed to provide with the package. I agreed,
but as soon as I tried to actually collect the sources, I painfully noticed
that those old files simply vanished into the thin air. As it turned out,
somehow I lost a whole disk of source files, including all sources for this
version -- except for the V01.22 player itself, thank goodness.

All I could send TLC instead were the source files of an earlier SIDwinder
(to be precise, V01.20). Although those versions are indeed very similar,
they were certainly different enough to take TLC a month of hard work (not
to mention the bonus of having to mess around with memory layouts, keyboard
mappings and various obscurities I left in there without a single comment).
It must have been a tough nut to crack, but he succeeded in it; I must say,
I was indeed amazed as I saw the first results! TLC didn't only manage to
fully accomplish the Plus/4 conversion, but also improved my editor in many
ways and fixed a few bugs that I overlooked.

My packer has always been some sort of an experimental work; it was rather
spartan, regarding both its functionality and user interface. As my source
files were gone, TLC decided to develop his own packer instead of trying to
reassemble the old binary code -- which was utterly useless anyway. For a
second time, he surprised me and the Plus/4 scene with a fabulous tool: his
packer thoroughly optimizes the memory usage and removes every unnecessary
component while compacting the music data. Furthermore, it comes with lots
of built-in functions which you would normally find in separate tools only:
just look at the various relocation options.

All in all, TLC has done a great job; I'm sure that both sides of the 8-bit
scene will value his efforts highly. Now I'm handing the microphone back to
the author himself. Thanks for your attention.


01.03 Finally...
----------------

As Taki said, I had to re-generate the sources from the previous editor
code and the disassembled V01.22 editor code, using some smart (Recomment...
thanks to Jouko Valta and André Fachat) and some simpler (self-coded
quick-and-dirty Pascal diff) routines. Then I slightly edited the source
- partially to make it compile to Plus/4, and partially to eliminate a few
features that I considered annoying; why not to do it, if I was right in the
business ;-).

(As a short remark to Taki's kind words regarding the work I did: it was all
some kind of a second or third division league game compared to his work of
creating this series, doing his experiments, the player, the editor and so
on...).

I then coded a new packer, because of the reasons mentioned above. It is still
also much likely an experimental work, so please excuse its sometimes strange
behaviour - rather, you're encouraged to report bugs if you find some ;-).

While coding, I kept my eyes on _not doing anything that causes the code not
to compile to C64 anymore. This raised a question - I asked Taki because I
wanted to do a Plus/4 conversion, but then I had _both a C64 and a Plus/4
editor with the slightly modified code; the SIDwinder V01.22 I had became
_not V01.22 inside anymore. Then what? I asked Taki if I should release the
editor also for the C64 platform; he kindly agreed, and after some talks
about the version name/numbering/marking of the 'new' series, this became
the SIDwinder V01.23 pack you just hold in your hands ;-).

Finally, in agreement with Taki's opinion, I decided to make _all sources
available to the public, since this makes sure that whoever wants to fiddle
with the editor code - this way, may implement valuable features -, can
definitely do this.


02 Thanks...
------------

  - Balázs Takács (Taki / Natural Beat) - for making this all possible
  - Luca Carrafiello (Luca / Fire) - beta testing and demosongs
  - Jouko Valta, André Fachat - Recomment reassembler
  - Pasi Ojala - PUcrunch
  - Speech Technology, Inc. - Table Driven Assembler
  - Ettore Perazzoli, Daniel Sladic, ...the VICE team - VICE
  - Mike Dailly - Minus4 1.6.2
  - Balázs Kovács (Joe / STA) - Star Commander
  - RIT Research Labs - DosNavigator V1.42
  - Peter Schepers - 64Copy
  - Borland Inc. - Borland Pascal and C

Special HiYa! goes to Coyote / Coroners.


03 How to start...
------------------

In general, the editor is almost the same as you may know as SIDwinder V01.22.
I only changed really a few things - you'll only notice that I fixed a few of
those bugs / drawbacks Taki mentions in his well written document of the
original editor.

For this reason, please read Taki's document that I decided to include to the
pack in original, with no modifications at all :-). Another document that will
probably help you in the first steps is the summary of features file. After
thinking it over again, I'd _strongly suggest to print out both documents and
keep them by hand. (You can do this either on a PC (or rather _any ASCII
compatible printer/computer/operating system) or your funky MPS series PETSCII
Commodore printer ;-). In this latter case, use the viewer routine's print
function.)


04 Detailed info
----------------

04.01 The editor
----------------

Well, really not much to tell about this part, since Taki documented it well
already (have I told you to go and read it? ;-) ). There are just a few things
you should know to avoid surprises.

First, there is no support for saving / loading bare memory images, as it was
present in all previous versions. The reason is simple: they became not
neccessary anymore. Until V01.22, the bare memory image was used for the
packer (it could load only this form). The V01.23 loads the same short
fileformat you used to save your musics.

(BTW, implementing them would have been hard anyway, because of the new
(different) memory map of the editor.)

You can load and edit songs created in the editors V01.2x (well, probably
V01.22 because the others were not public). The song data format was not
touched in any ways, except for the identity field (V01.22 --> V01.23).

When you're composing multispeed music, especially 4x and above, you'll notice
that the player calls are spread around the frame (approximately equal time
intervals between the calls).

Some other issues. The first few lines in the arpeggio table are not reserved
for the channel off function of the editor anymore. This function was
implemented with gate bit masking in the player instead. You can now use all
rows in the arpeggio table, plus you'll hear no awful clicking when you
switch off a channel.

Similarly, the last sector, $5f is no longer reserved for the liveplay function
 - you're free to use it for your own purposes. When talking about this
function, I must mention that it was also recoded a bit - you'll hear no
clicks when you test your instruments.

Just one more thing to note: the editor was designed for PAL machines only.
The SID frequency value tables are for the PAL clock(s), and so are the IRQ
handler routines. The editor is not intended to run in NTSC machines for the
moment, though, it may start and run on them. Porting the editor to NTSC
won't be a hard work - just a matter of some coding.


04.02 The packer
----------------

This is an entirely new part of the package. When I was at the point of
reconstructing the old program code, I rather decided to rewrite everything
from scratch instead. This way, it was possible for me to keep the whole
mechanism under control - I could start with the loader, the memory map and
so on. I could also implement all features I wanted instead of tinkering with
the original - separate - relocator code.

Packer V01.23 loads the compact data format the editor handles. You can also
load and pack songs created in the previous editors of the V01.2x series.

The packing starts with some passes of parsing the data. In the packer code,
this is implemented with 'full' data examination (infos on the algorithm
can be found in the programmers info file).

This packer is a bit more forgiving to the composer regarding loose data,
instruments and so on than the predecessor packer routine was. You don't have
to edit all unnecessary data out from your music by hand before packing -
the packer will do that.

From the other hand, the packer needs a bit of precaution from you, because of
these tricks.

  - First and most important, if you compose soundtracks containing more
    subsongs, take care of NEVER letting your track tables overlap each other.
    Overlapping can occur in every 8th subsongs, by mis-aligning the
    appropriate start pointers of the subsongs (check Taki's SIDwinder document
    on the purpose of Start pointers). If you do this, the packer will fail to
    determine the length of the track tables of the subsongs, and this will
    lead it to crash. So, before saving your song that you'll pack, always
    check the start pointers in the sound editor screen - if your song contains
    only one subsong, be sure to set all of them to 0.
  - Take care of 'closing' your tables correctly - always place a JMPxx to the
    end of your song data in the track tables, FINISH to the end of the sector
    datas (these are BTW also needed by the editor I/O routines) and jump
    commands to the end of the last effects of the effect tables.

If you follow these suggestions, you'll most probably have no problems with the
packer.

Since it is a new routine and still hasn't been under intensive testing,
you may find bugs when you use it. If you experience such behaviour, please
contact me.

The user interface of the packer is rather spartian; the same feeling as it
was coded in the good old BASIC ;-). From the other hand, it should do all
tasks you need in such a subject.

  - Filename. Should be obvious. You have to enter the filename of your song
    (the data file you saved from SIDwinder), or you can ask for directory
    (of the current disk) by '$'.

  - Number of subsongs (mostly, '1' :-) ).

  - Start address in memory. The address you want the packed song to start at.
    The value must be given in hexadecimal, without prefix (e.g. '1000').

  - Reserved zeropage word. The player uses just one pointer on the zeropage,
    and this is the $fb-$fc pair in the original SIDwinder player. Usually,
    you don't have to do much with this setting - just enter 'fb'. Sometimes,
    if your program, e.g. a demopart uses certain areas in the zeropage, you
    can select another for the player to make them not to hurt each other.
    (Thanks to Taki for suggesting me this feature).

  - SID baseaddress. This doesn't seem to be much useful for a C64 musician -
    just enter 'd400'. For the Plus/4 users, you should select it to $fd40 by
    default (...I suggest to read the other file ('Plus/4 users'...)).

  - Freqtable. This has also something to do with the platform you want your
    song to be played on. Regardless to what platform you used when you
    created the song, you should select the appropriate table for the _target
    platform.
    (The C64 SID and the SID in the Plus/4 SID card runs at a slightly
    different clock - that's why they need different frq table. For more info
    see the 'chapter' I mentioned above).

  - Identity field edit. You have 32 chars to describe your handle, the title
    of the song or whatever you find important to note in the music data :-).
    The packer copies this text in screencode to the player start address +
    $20 ($1020 by default). You find a 'ruler' above the input line. ...Well,
    really minimal user interface, but it works.

Then hopefully, your song gets packed (if the packing doesn't finish in _few
seconds, that's bad luck since it crashed. Please contact me). Enter the
filename you want your packed file to be saved to. That's all.


04.03 The ASCII viewer
----------------------

I haven't wasted much words regarding this piece of code, although I think it
has its valuable features.

  - Standard ASCII compatibility. Nonstandard ASCII chars are either converted
    to space or their respective equivalents in the standard charset (e.g.
    Hungarian accented letters).
  - Can both view and print texts (printing on standard PETSCII printers, not
    well tested).
  - 80 columns display. 4x8 charset.
  - End of line is determined by linefeeds ($0a). CR's ($0d) are skipped.
  - TAB capability (TABs are converted to spaces)
  - Standard file I/O, not well buffered (except for printing; a 256 byte
    buffer is used).
  - Runs on a C64, or a Plus/4 (even with 16K of RAM, so C-16 owners can also
    use it).

In the viewer screen the Return, Space, Home and <- (on Plus/4: ESC) keys work
(page down, line down, go top and back to load text, respectively).


05 Possible improvements...
---------------------------

Well, there are so much I can't even count :-(.

- First of all, the player should not use absolute frequency data for the
  effects at all.

- Digi channel(s). ...Would imply a lot of things to do, like:

   - The above one (frq value independent effects)
   - Reorganized editor (at least, track editor - to edit more than 3
     channels, and new sound editor)
   - Dynamic memory allocation in the editor (since it won't fit into the
     memory anyway)
   - A completely new NMI routine, in order to make those sounds play...

 - Reorganized code for subsongs (because I hate 'start pointers')

 - A lot of things in the editor code, to make it more user friendly. New
   editor features, colors...

 - Play native Plus/4 sounds through the TED (maybe simultaneously with the
   SID channels).

...And so on.

Please don't seriously count on me to do these improvements. I like this
editor, but I think I should find some better use of my time... But you can
do all improvements, if you found the appearance of this pack promising.


06 Contact
----------

- Balázs Takács (Taki/Natural beat)

  E-mail: takinb@sch.bme.hu (presumably available until 2001)
  S-mail: Balázs Takács, Thokoly str. 26, 9300 Csorna, Hungary

- Levente Hársfalvi (sometimes, but not really often, known as TLC / Coroners)

  E-mail: levente@terrasoft.hu
  S-mail: Levente Hársfalvi, Gorkij 33, 7200 Dombóvár, Hungary


Hopefully this pack, the sources and possible later versions will be available
at:

- Natural Beat's homepage: http://www.sch.bme.hu/~takinb
- The c64.rulez.org ftp site:
  ftp://c64.rulez.org/pub/c64/Tools/Music/Editor/
  ftp://c64.rulez.org/pub/plus4/Tools/Music/

- The Funet ftp site:
  ftp://ftp.funet.fi/pub/cbm/c64/audio/editors/
  ftp://ftp.funet.fi/pub/cbm/plus4/Tools/Music/
